Parent Letter (Session 1)

It was a pleasure to teach the Mock Senate class for SEP this summer. I'm grateful for the chance to spend time with such a talented group of students. The Mock Senate aimed to teach debate techniques, parliamentary procedure, and strategies for crafting policy. To do so, we also needed to cover some essential ideological positions of the major U.S. political parties, and to introduce the students to the basics of political theory. Since the aim was to think about policy critically, each student played the role of a current U.S. Senator, writing and debating legislation as that senator would. Since the students wrote the legislation, the particular debate topics were up to them. 
On the whole, I thought the class succeeded. The students gradually accustomed to the Rules of the Senate for their deliberations, and by the end of the session the floor debates were going quite smoothly. Playing the roles was harder, but part of the hurdle was the limited time we had to research the various senators' views. Still, by the end of the session, the students were playing their roles well enough that the debates included many of the ideological positions represented in the real Senate. We debated several interesting topics: eliminating the penny, NASA, the postal service, gun control, immigration, etc. The quality of the debates at times suffered from the absence of research, but I am sure that if there were more time to study some of the issues, the level of debate would have been that much higher. Even with our minimal resources, the students generally did a good job presenting the policy ideas. Some of the legislation was quite ingenious and detailed, especially given the limited time to prepare it, which further improved the quality of the debate.
There is a wealth of information available for further study. Many of the handouts from the class have footnote references that will give a lot more detail about the topics we covered only briefly. Beyond those resources, here are three broad categories of suggestions for more study: First, as we saw in class, the Senate streams its proceedings online. This is a great way to see how the Senate works—for better or for worse, it isn't much like our Mock Senate. The most direct and prestigious way to learn about the Senate is through the Senate Page program, which recruits high school students to work for the Senate for a semester. Second, students can learn more about current policy issues. As I mentioned in class, newspaper opinion pages and news magazines are a good place to start reading about policy debates that are ill-suited for the TV news networks. Much of the work of the government involves important but relatively boring details. Reading journalists who specialize in policy (instead of merely politics) is a great way to learn about what it takes to keep our government and nation running. Though these writers are usually partisan, they often teach by providing excellent summaries of the theories that inform public deliberation. Third, for students who enjoyed debating, most schools offer a debate class. In conjunction, the National Forensics League sponsors speech and debate tournaments between schools. One of their events is Mock Congress, which has some similarities to our class. They also sponsor several other kinds of debate events. One last thing: At the end of our class, I challenged the students to actively seek to understand their own views and the views of people in very different life circumstances. I would reiterate that challenge here. I hope that participating in the Mock Senate has impressed on the students the difficulty of serious political engagement. But I also hope that they have tasted the value of public deliberation and are better prepared to engage in it.

